In fact, he even suggested, which let everybody
know he was serious, why don't we just really
curtail admissions to the College of Engineering
until we get them some more space.
What was their reaction to that proposal? Not too
good. They wanted things to keep growing. And I
think some had visions that someday we might catch
up to the University of Texas. I keep worrying that
that is their goal. If you could determine the
enrollment in engineering here without having to
explain it to anyone, what total would you set? You
mean now? On now?
I wouldn't have it quite as high as it is now. I
wouldn't either. Now, that would mean I wouldn't
have to explain it to the voter because that would
be very difficult. Are there other regents that
were also strong supporters of Renzi? Well, there
were ones thinking about it, but they never
verbally supported it strongly. But, of course, I
left the room, there was lots of discussion, and
then they got Mr. Powell, from the physical plan in
they started talking about things as a result of
that you can almost count the buildings around
here you know this building engineering physics
building uh... that new petroleum building the
new building that's uh... for aerospace
computing and so forth quite a few popped up but i
think space is still a little bit of a problem
because Were there some important gifts, either
equipment or funding, during those years? Well,
probably one of the biggest gifts that helped a lot
was from Mr. Zachary on computing. He thought we
ought to be up-to-date in computing, and so he made
several significant discs. Now, was that H.B.
Zachary? Yeah, Pat Zachary. Pat Zachary. Yeah.
Let's see, any legislators that you remember as
being helpful? No, there were never any problems,
but nobody that really stood up and hollered for us
or anything like that. During your years as dean,
what relations, if any, did you have with the
University of Texas Engineering program? Oh, I
knew Dean Goyna over there very well. What's his
name? Goyna was dean of engineering.
G-L-O-Y-N-A? G-L-O-Y-N-A, Goyna. And he was dean
of engineering. In fact, he sent me a
congratulation note as soon as it came out that I
was dean here and we had meetings together and the
deans of the Texas engineering schools met at
least once a year, sometimes more, compared our
notes on things. But the relationship with the
University of Texas and engineering were very
good. So there was no problem there. Lots of
cooperation. Which of the engineering programs
in the state, for which did you have the highest
regard? I'm not going to ask the negative. It's
hard to say. I think before I came here I would have
said when I was in New Jersey I probably would have
said Rice University because it's had such a good
standard and controls the enrollment with the
resources and so forth. But I found A lot of them
were doing a good job, so I didn't have a leader or
anything. During your dean years, some key
faculty appointments that you look back upon with
pride?
Did we bring any new key folks? Oh, well, there's so
many, but screened them very carefully, and
everybody that got in that got through the dean's
office was well qualified, I think, so didn't have
any problems that way. mention a bunch of names,
but they're all doing well. Of course, I was really
pleased when we had this tall young man from Kansas
that wanted to be a faculty member here after he got
his degree, and that was Bud Peterson. I don't know
whether you ever encountered him, but he Turned
out very well in mechanical engineering,
actually, although I wasn't at that time. I was
over in the dean's office, and I remember having
some fun with him because he had a little error in
his resume, and I asked him about that. But anyway,
he became department head here after a few years.
Then he was an associate dean over in the dean's
office here, and last year he left and went up to RPI
as the provost. So he's moving right along. Very
good. Summarize these, this list you gave,
summarize those accomplishments. Well, I
thought that, I hadn't mentioned it in detail to
you, but I did implement an enrollment management
plan. We just couldn't have the students coming
in, flooding in like that. How did it Well, it
worked. There were a lot of parts to it. One was
admission criteria at the freshman level went up.
The transfer students coming in at the junior
level, we made that pretty difficult, too.
Otherwise, there was a way they could make an end
run around that. And then retention. And
retention, that happened at the end of the
sophomore level, whether it could go on into the
junior or senior year or transferring to some
other college, whatever they wish. And that
worked very well. I forget what I called it. I made
one mistake when I first presented it. I had to have
the approval of the Board of Regents. I forget what
I called it. I should remember that, but they
didn't like that at all. Then I went back and called
it an enrollment management plan. Well, that was
okay. So anyway, that went through. And of course,
we were very active at that time in engineering,
recruiting National Merit Scholars, because I
found that every one you brought in, there were
other students in the school that came along. So it
really helped us. And in 1982, we had 189 of them.
And then we started up computer science, I
mentioned, and got the graduate enrollment going
along, introduced computer-aided instruction
in pilot courses then. And then I had an assistant
dean, Terry Schau, who also is somebody that I
hired once before in the East, and he was down in
Houston. I brought him in, and he had a very
skillful way of handling minorities, and he
started up summer enrichment programs for
minorities to get them in here. In that case, he was
bringing in high school seniors or juniors and got
them interested. Many of them came back later. And
he also, he started up the first... I think it was
called the Black Engineering Society, and gave
them a charge. Their charge was to take the
incoming blacks, African Americans, and make
sure that they worked, stayed in school. So that
turned out to be very good. So that helped on the
student side. And of course, as far as what they
were taking, the curriculum, all of our programs
went through accreditation well. Engineering
Technology was an interesting program to me
because when I first came here, it seemed to be
getting a lot of funding was different than a lot of
schools and was handled on about the same level as
every engineering program whereas most schools
considered it a little bit different type and
didn't require all the resources that the others
did but anyway we restructured those programs
started up a department of computer science and
asked each department to set its five-year
program goals for five years so that helped a lot
And then with the faculty, of course, I developed a
new committee structure for the college. I
actually put out booklets so they knew who was
doing what and the charge for each committee was
there. and put out new guidelines for promotion
and tenure because they didn't exist. Had a little
fuss with the T's, the people on that, the head of
T's, Porter, because he wanted to know the dollar
amount of every research account that came in. I
said, no, I just want to know if they got support and
in what area. The forms were made out that way. We
got these mid-year salary increases that I
mentioned. And then with the computer, we got new
computer equipment. Fortunately, we got outside
funding to pay for that. And then I made a study,
which it turned out...
Don't worry. No problem. It turned out that... I
studied what we had in terms of dollars here for
equipment and then compared that to some national
information I had and then the other Texas deans
got involved and we calculated up for the whole
state. And then I wrote a short note which appeared
in American Society of Engineering Education. So
then we had a $1 billion shortage for the state of
Texas. And then the legislature got busy on that.
And I was no longer dean when the money started
coming through. But money came through for
equipment funds and so forth to bring us up to date.
And while I was here, of course, we had national
meetings here. I got the Engineering Council for
Professional Development for accreditation to
meet here. We had the ASE annual conference,
American Society of Engineering Education. That
was in 82. Brought a lot of people to campus which
wouldn't normally have come here. And then we
started a memorandum of agreement with a German
university where I knew some people. So we started
exchanging some students, had their faculty
coming over here. It's been very productive over
the years and worked out very well. In fact, many
faculties told me that they liked having those
German students in their graduate classes
because it showed the American students what kind
of competition they'd be up against. Of course,
they were carefully selected by this German
university to be the best, but that worked out
well. And then we started an alumni honors
program, which I mentioned to you earlier, and we
had an engineering development council, which
involved off-campus people. and I was surprised
there were no annual reports or anything for the
College of Engineering that could be circulated
nationally because I was used to in most cases in
the past I'd always get a few annual reports from
leading colleges of engineering so we produced
the first report of the college And we decided it
was quite an effort to do it and do all the other
things while we do it every two years. So two of
those reports went out while I was dean on a
national mailing basis. Nice color brochures
showing what we were doing, what was up to date, and
so forth. And then the last item, one that I wanted
to mention, was they started an engineering
industry teaching program to bring
practitioners onto campus. And this was also
through the help of Pat Zachary. He funded some
money, something special thing where he had made
some money in South America, and he endowed that so
that we'd have money to bring somebody in from
industry for a few weeks or longer and participate
in our program to give more of the industrial
flavor to the students and faculty. And I thought
that was very good. As you look back on those years,
can you think of any opportunities that we missed,
oversight?
No, I can't really. As I said, when I came here, one
of the things that attracted me was the challenge.
I knew there was a lot to be done, and it kept me busy,
and I ended up with an exceptionally good team in my
office. I kept referring to it as a basketball
team. You didn't have to look before you threw the
ball. They all knew what they were supposed to do.
So I'd say no opportunities that we really missed.
Describe, if there was such, describe a typical
day for the Dean of Engineering during that time.
What time did you get here and normally what kinds
of activities would the dean have to get involved
in? Yeah, I wish there was a typical day, but I don't
recall that there was one, but I always got here
very early in the morning. I'd be in before the
secretaries like quarter of eight or something
like that and see what was laying on the desk. But
then the day would be very full. I tried to get out of
the office a lot and visit the other departments
because only some of the departments at that time
were in the Zachary Building and see what was going
on. have a lot of paperwork to take care of because
due to some strange circumstances, for a while we
did not have any sort of a financial helper in the
dean's office. We had a Mr. Fenner who did a good
job, but then he was unhappy that the
reorganization wasn't being carried out to
improve, so he left. So we had to do that ourselves.
I had to work it out with some secretaries and make
sure that all the proper financial forms were
filled out and handled so that the money was spent
properly and appropriately. So that kept me busy.
going on to a typical day, there'd always be some
people to meet with, and I gave the secretary, my
secretary, blocks of time where she could
schedule people, but there were other blocks
where she could not because I had to get work done.
But I'd keep working, and it'd usually be 7.30 or 8
o'clock at night before I'd go home and then have
dinner with my wife. How often did you get a call
from a board, directly from a regent? I don't think
I ever did. Legislator? No, never got a direct call
like that. I often got direct calls from newspaper
people. About what? Oh, about anything that they
thought might be worth the media getting involved
in. You're meaning reporters? Yeah, reporters,
right. But there were no big... There was no big
pressure coming the other way. No big front page
story? No, no. And no catastrophes, accidents?
during those years were there? No, no. I was lucky
that way. How much time did you have to spend out of
town? How much time on the road? Well, I
would say four
or five days every month, something like that.
There were contacts I had to make on behalf of the
college, fortunately a lot of them in Texas and
Dallas or San Antonio. San Antonio was a hard place
to get to because it takes time, but then Houston.
But also in New York City and I went out to Seattle
quite a bit because I had some other friends in
Boeing out there and the University of Washington
and I got Boeing to make some contributions at the
right time when we needed things, so that helped
out. In a way, I didn't spend too much time away, but
here was very, very challenging and sometimes
very tiring because what schedule I told you, that
held six days a week, except on the sixth day there
weren't any secretaries around, so I could really
get through a lot of that mail that piled up.
Unfortunately, or fortunately, I don't know, I
had a secretary that was brand new. and I had
trouble teaching her between to make piles you
know things that had to be taken care of right away
things that could wait a little bit and things that
were absolutely junk mail but uh... so I tackled
some of those piles but the junk mail and the other
stuff sometimes wait till Saturday when it could
just tear through that stuff. During those
leadership years, what were some of the high
points, the most proud moments? Well, I think that
one of the ones was when we have a group like the
Board of Directors of the Accreditation Board,
the National Accreditation Board, beat here, and
we have them here for a couple days to see directly
what's going on, and they're liking things.
That's good. And also when we had the American
Society for Engineering Education here, Jim Earl
did the main job of arranging everything. I don't
recall the number, but we probably had about 1,500
or 2,000 educators from around the United States
here at that time. And that did us a lot of good.
Every year after that, I'd bump into somebody who
said, oh, down at A&M, that was so good. They stayed
in the dorms and we had lots of student activity.
The students were typical Aggies, very kind to
everybody. The students ran buses for them around
campus where they had to go. Lots of good
friendships developed. Do you remember, did the
dean ever get victimized by any kind of Aggie joke,
Aggie prank?
No, if he did, I didn't hear him. They kept it away
from me, I guess. No, I never heard of anything of
that sort. Of course, every dean hears a dean's
jokes, but that's just normal procedure. Sure,
sure. As you then finished your term as dean, where
were we best and where were we not as good as you
wanted us to be?
Well, we still hadn't, of course, since it takes
time to build buildings, we hadn't solved the
space problem at all. And we were still short on
faculty. The teaching loads were too high, and
that definitely was not good. What we were best,
though, was that we had a faculty that was pretty
enthusiastic and highly motivated. I tried to
talk to them a lot. keep them informed on where we
were heading and see if they agreed to be heading
there. And I think I got very good cooperation from
them. All right, now I've just about run out of
thoughts about questions. What have we not
covered?
You didn't have an illness problem. No. So nothing
like that. No, I grabbed some stuff before I left
here. We covered the
And the enrollment, you mentioned the enrollment
went up and research volume went up.
During those years, what did you and your wife do
for relaxation? What were your favorite
avocations? Well, it was kind of difficult
because, as you know, Dean keeps busy. But the
prime thing for us was to make sure that we got
together with the family, usually at holidays
like Christmas holiday. The first Christmas we
were here, I think all the children came in. And
then as they got children themselves, they
started to alternate because they wanted
Christmas at home or at the other side of the
family. and of course the first Christmas here I
always remember that was interesting because
after we had all these guests in then a couple times
we thought we'd go out to eat but at that time all the
restaurants were closed in town because the
students were away and not many people were
staying in town then except a few foreign students
so that became a problem but that's all changed now
now did y'all have a key church home here yes we did
yeah A church home? Yes. Yeah, well, our Savior's
Lutheran Church. And you were Lutherans before
you got here? We were Lutherans before we got here,
yeah. And we checked it out when we came down here
and looked around and so forth. And who have been
your closest personal friends? Uh... That's hard
to say. I had a lot of good friends. I think probably
when Skip Fletcher came on board since he was the
associate dean, probably the closest. Okay,
then as I get near the end, if you were brought in as
the hired consultant, to advise Texas A&M's
decision makers today about the College of
Engineering, what advice would you give them?
Assuming that there are no restraints on the
advice you could offer. I
probably would hit on the same thing that I watched
over the years and that is the space for faculty.
and classrooms and so forth. We need to,
obviously, we need to modernize classrooms and
things like that. But, for example, right next
door here, two people use that office. One is
former director of the Johnson Space Center,
Aaron Cullen. Same size as this one. Because there
are more offices available. So, and I think a
serious faculty member that wants to do a good job,
he ought to have a nice private office where he can.
What about organizational structure? Would you
have any advice about? No. The way it sits here, I
guess it's fairly well organized in terms of
departments and so forth. Some schools have tried
to give that up, but I think you could do, as far as
curriculum goes, you could do a lot more with the
freshman year and so forth than we do now. How so?
Well, I think you ought to make it more of a
self-speed learning experience rather than
formal instruction because a lot of the students
are ready to do that, where they become the one that
decides how fast they learn. That can be done by the
right kind of lecture techniques or by computers.
There are lots of ways to do it, but let them move as
fast as they want. Would you have any advice about
enrollment size for the college? Too big. Too big
for the faculty and resources. What number would
you suggest they consider? Well, I'd say probably
around 8,000 would be fine, yeah. And instead of
10? Instead of 10, something where they are now,
yeah. Would you have limits for each of the majors
in that eight? Yeah, I think it should be... keep
them comparable in size so that the person, you
wouldn't have one department that's dominating.
What about the relative emphasis of the
undergraduate and the graduate? Well, I think
that We really ought to put more emphasis on
graduate right now than we are doing because in
today's world, you almost need that master's
degree, period. PhD is not essential for
everybody by any means, but master's is getting
almost essential. And the administrative
organizational structure, what would be the
relationship with the dean and the experiment
station? I don't know. Well, I like the kind of
arrangement they have now where there's one dean
that has all that under control. but like and
you've been president and administrator at many
levels I think that sometime rather we've got to
measure not only the student-faculty ratio but
the student-administrator ratio and
administrators have grown like mad and For
example, when I was dean, we started up this
program with Germany, an exchange program for
faculty and students, ran smooth, never got money
from anywhere else or anything like that. Now, I
don't know, we've gotten this associate provost,
I guess, international fairs couple of assistant
provosts for the same thing you know and it seems
like we have a lot of people there now why is that a
problem well of course it takes resources but also
the faculty get tired of getting these
questionnaires from some provost that has
minimum responsibilities and must want to fill up
a file cabinet or something with returns I would
check that student administrative ratio Do you
have any engineering programs in mind that would
be possibly good models for Texas A&M? Who are some
other schools that we might want to? Well, those do
change rather rapidly, but as the different
programs have been reviewed around the country, I
thought Duke was headed in the right direction as
far as their engineering program goes. Although
the first time I reviewed them, I came down hard on
them because they weren't using computers in
their classroom. That's some time ago, you know,
and not putting enough emphasis on it. Well,
that's all been changed. What about among the
land-grant schools? Among the land-grant
schools? I just visited last week up at State
College, Pennsylvania. About the same size as us
now. I was surprised, 44,000 on that campus, on the
main campus. They seem to be very well organized,
very well organized, and doing well in many of
their programs, yeah. We used them as one of our
models in the early 60s when we were dreaming of
what A&M might become. They had already moved.
They and Michigan State, and they were two of our
college models. Let's see. What administrator or
administrators would you want to say thank you,
express appreciation to? Mike Prescott. No
question about it. In fact, he wrote a little book.
I don't know whether I can put my little pamphlet on
about quality in the academic atmosphere. Once in
a while I pull that out and show it to people. I think
it's over there somewhere, a little pamphlet. But
I think he did a lot for the university. You know you
worked closely with him. Every chance he had, he
had people remembering that we were going for
quality here. We weren't second rate. All right,
then my last question would be what feelings do you
have in your heart for Texas A&M today? Oh, very
strong. I'm up at the Notre Dame game with a couple
of my, well, I should say with two sons, two
son-in-laws. No, I feel very strong about that.
I'm a converted Aggie, I guess. All right, let's
quit with that then.
When it has no sound, it stops? Yes.
It has sound. One more time. It has that.